=== PAGE 8 ===
PART ONE
Introduction to
Fermentation

=== PAGE 9 ===

=== PAGE 10 ===

=== PAGE 11 ===
H
Introduction
umans have long loved, even craved, fermented foods and drinks.
Without fermentation, we’d have no wine or cheese. We also wouldn’t have
salami, prosciutto, bread, beer, yogurt, or sourdough. Some fermented foods
are very pungent, like kimchi or sauerkraut. Some have peculiar textures,
ranging from slippery to sticky. We love these stinky, pungent foods.
Perhaps we love them because in the past there was no other choice;
sauerkraut and other fermented foods were important to keep us alive
when winter made farming or hunting impossible. Perhaps we love them
because our bodies crave them to stay healthy and strong.
The fermentation process has the effect of preserving foods, so it was an
important way for humans to feed themselves when fresh foods were
scarce. It also converts starches in foods to make them more easily
digestible. Eating fermented foods improves our digestion by introducing
living probiotic cultures into our guts and helps us absorb more of the
nutrients from the foods we eat.
Fermented foods have been changed by microbial activity. The word
“fermentation” indicates that this change is beneficial. Some bacteria are
benign, some are beneficial, and some are harmful. When a microbial
system is in balance, whether in our gut or in our food, harmful microbes
are kept in check by beneficial ones. When the system is disrupted, harmful
microbes can get the upper hand and flourish at the expense of beneficial
ones. That is the difference between a fine wine and moldy grape juice, or
between a delicious cheese and spoiled milk.

=== PAGE 12 ===

=== PAGE 13 ===

=== PAGE 14 ===
CHAPTER ONE
Good Reasons to Ferment
People who live in Asian countries like Korea and China, cultures where
fermented foods like pickles and yogurt are common, are healthier and live
longer, and the evidence that fermented foods are beneficial to our health is
growing.
Fermented foods are not only good for us, but also delicious.
Fermentation creates complex flavors—fizzy and tart, savory and satisfying
—that no other kind of food has.
When you make your own fermented foods, you will derive the greatest
nutritional benefit from them. Commercial pickles and other fermented
products may not have been made through true fermentation; they may
have been only been cured in vinegar. The flavor, although similar, is rarely
as robust as an artisanal or homemade version. Even foods that are
fermented using traditional methods can lose their potency, since the
process of pasteurization can kill off most of the beneficial bacteria.
FERMENTING BOOSTS HEALTH
There are many health benefits when you eat fermented foods on a regular
basis. These foods are an aid to digestion. They restore the colonies of
healthy bacteria (flora) in the gut, another name for the alimentary canal,
which is the place where food is digested and absorbed into the human
body. This includes the stomach and the intestines. Studies have shown that
fermented foods can lessen or reduce allergies. They reduce plaque bacteria
in the mouth, resulting in fewer cavities and healthier gums. When people
include fermented foods in their diets, they tend to lose weight more easily.
And fermented foods may even help prevent such serious diseases as

=== PAGE 15 ===
arthritis and atherosclerosis.
Why does balancing flora in the gut matter? When things get out of
balance, the natural defense against harmful bacteria is not as robust. That
is when we can start to experience a wide range of problems, from
headaches to diarrhea to allergies. It is very easy for us to throw our balance
out of whack simply by living an average, modern lifestyle. Poor food
choices, emotional stress, poor sleep habits, even environmental conditions
can easily upset the flora in the gut. Introducing fermented foods, with their
beneficial living microorganisms, can bring things back into balance.
FERMENTING CREATES HEALTHY PROBIOTICS
Fermentation depends on thriving colonies of friendly microbes to do its
work. Once the microbes find themselves in the friendly environment of a
food with plenty of water and nutrients, they start to grow and reproduce.
As they consume the sugars in the food, they produce alcohol and carbon
dioxide. This changes the flavor and texture of the food. When we eat them,
they go directly to the gut, where they encourage the growth of even more
healthy bacteria.
The word “probiotic” comes from Greek words that mean “promoting
life.” A probiotic is a living organism. That is why you see the words “live” or
“living” on the labels of your favorite yogurt. In fact, most fermented foods
contain probiotics and prebiotics. Prebiotics do not actually contain the
living organism themselves; they do create a favorable environment for
healthy microbes. Both probiotics and prebiotics work together to promote
digestive health and boost the immune system.
As their names indicate, probiotics and antibiotics perform opposite
tasks. We take antibiotics in order to kill or weaken harmful bacteria that
have increased and caused an illness. We eat probiotics because they
promote the growth of beneficial bacteria that support the immune system.
FERMENTING SUPPORTS IMMUNITY
Our immune system has evolved to protect us from a wide range of dangers
in our environment. The first line of defense is the digestive system, which

=== PAGE 16 ===
not only takes in nutrients but also filters toxins out. It contains nearly 80
percent of the body’s bacteria, nearly 100 trillion bacteria. If you could
separate all the bacteria cells from the body’s cells, the bacteria cells would
outweigh the body cells.
The gut is the largest organ in the immune system and responsible for
nearly half the body’s immune response. There are the same number of
neurotransmitters in your gut as in your brain, and this has led scientists
and researchers who study the immune system to refer to it as a secondary
nervous system. Over time, it has become apparent that the microbes in the
gut communicate with immune cells and cause them to perform in a specific
fashion. In addition to promoting good digestion, these microbes also
support and may even activate the immune system.
Inflammation is associated with a wide range of diseases. Stiff and
swollen joints that come from arthritis are one example. Cardiac disease is
another. It appears that the probiotics in fermented foods can reduce this
inflammation by communicating directly with the cells that cause the
inflammation in the first place.
FERMENTING AIDS DIGESTION
A healthy digestive tract can do its job easily. As it breaks down the foods
we eat, it absorbs the nutrients and water that our bodies need. It also
filters out toxins and other harmful substances in the food.
Sometimes, the foods we eat can interfere with our bodies’ ability to
digest them. You’ve probably heard some foods described as “easy to
digest.” What that means is that the body does not have to work as hard to
extract the nutrients and filter out the toxins.
The process of fermentation removes or inactivates substances in foods
that might otherwise give us digestive trouble. One such substance is known
as phytates, which have been referred to as antinutrients. Instead of
providing nourishment, phytates prevent us from digesting foods.
That is why phytate-rich foods like grains, nuts, seeds, and legumes need
to be processed in some way before we can get any nourishment from them.
Although we often think of processing in negative terms, the type of
processing that we are referring to here includes primarily drying, grinding,
and cooking. Fermentation plays a hand even here; that is why grains are

=== PAGE 17 ===
allowed to “age” after they are ground.
Fermented foods are, in effect, already digested by the time we eat them.
The bacteria in cultured dairy foods have already consumed the lactose in
milk, which explains why some lactose-intolerant individuals can consume
yogurt or cheese without a problem.
FERMENTING PRESERVES FOODS
All of us have probably left something in the refrigerator too long or out on
the counter overnight. The food has definitely changed. It might be moldy,
or withered, or even frothy. You might see molds of various colors or the
food may look as if it has simply melted. And then there is the smell. A food
that has rotted smells truly awful. A food that is fermented usually smells
strong, but it still smells appetizing.
Fermenting strikes the balance between creating an environment that
allows the good microbes to thrive and that slows down or stops the bad
microbes from turning food into a science project. If you control the process
successfully, you end up with something edible.
Many fermented foods are often combined with a significant amount of
salt. Salt destroys the microbes that might cause foods to spoil or putrefy.
With those microbes out of the way, there is less competition for food, so
the healthy microbes can take hold.
FERMENTING IS TRADITIONAL
It isn’t hard to understand why our forbearers first became interested in
harnessing the process of fermentation. It was a question of survival. If
there is one thing our current love affair with seasonal eating has done
successfully, it is to remind us of what our ancestors always knew: If you are
going to make it from one season to the next, you need to prepare. You need
a place to shelter you, clothes to keep you warm, and food to keep you
strong, even when the wild game is gone, the heifer has gone dry, and the
fruit trees are finished producing. This is our human patrimony, passed
down to us by those who learned to harness microbes and make milk into
cheese, grapes into wine, and anchovies into fish sauce.

=== PAGE 18 ===
Every cuisine on earth has a tradition of fermented foods. Egyptians
controlled yeast to make both bread and beer. Fruit juices left to ferment
have been made into wines, cordials, and tonics for thousands of years; they
are a part of the culinary tradition anywhere there are vineyards or
orchards. The Romans were famous for their garum, which was essentially
fermented fish guts. Norwegians realized that the salmon they buried and
left behind as they continue to fish upstream was different, but delicious.
Adding salt to the salmon before they buried it pulled the water out of the
fish that would otherwise make it rot. Today, we have gravlax with cream
cheese on a bagel. The barrel of vegetable scraps left to age through a cold
Russian winter was the original borscht, nothing more than fermented ends
and cores of beets and cabbages and onions. Today, fermented beet juice,
known as kvass, is acknowledged as a rich, healthy drink. Long ago in Korea,
burying cabbage to last through the winter ultimately resulted in what we
know as kimchi. In Europe, sauerkraut was the Western equivalent.
Traditionally prepared pickles were always preserved in salt; the lactic
acid produced during fermentation gave them their tartness. Commercially
prepared pickles today are rarely made with salt; instead, the vegetables are
preserved in vinegar. If you are looking for traditional pickles in the market,
read the label. If you see vinegar as a main ingredient, they are not
fermented pickles.
FERMENTING LETS YOU EXPERIMENT
Foods that are fermented using traditional techniques have a fantastic
flavor. They are quite easy to make, although you do have to allow time for
the fermentation to happen. That said, fermentation is also a craft. Every
batch you make will have its own character because every environment is
different. You don’t have the same conditions every day, even in your own
home.
Supermarkets have started stocking bottles of drinks like kombucha and
kefir. With very little effort or expense, you can make these drinks and a
host of other fermented foods. The process takes several hours or several
days, but your only task is to maintain a friendly environment and perhaps
feed the mixture from time to time.
Once you know the basics, you can ferment virtually any vegetable or

=== PAGE 19 ===
fruit, make sodas from teas or juices, and even create your own fermented
beans for miso and tempeh.

=== PAGE 20 ===
CHAPTER 2
An Overview of
Fermentation
Our very survival as humans is linked to fermentation. Evidence of
controlled fermentation goes back to the earliest agricultural settlements in
Europe, Asia, and South America. Like all basic human skills, fermentation
was developed through trial and error. The methods earlier generations
developed were based on the evidence before them: what temperature was
most favorable, what amount of salt or sugar was needed, what resulted
when foods were buried or submerged, and how long it takes for
fermentation to stop.
Today, we have a better understanding of what happens during
fermentation and how the food is being changed. It is helpful to think of
fermentation as an ecosystem, with a variety of different organisms all
doing their best to survive. The types of species in the system have a direct
effect on the chemical composition of the environment.
Fermentation depends on the dynamics of the population (the types of
microbes present in the system), the limits to the source of nutrition, and
competition for those nutrients. The natural environment of the
fermentation system determines what the fermented food will taste, look,
sound, and feel like.
THE FERMENTATION PROCESS
The organisms responsible for fermentation are in the atmosphere, whether
we specifically add them or not. Uncontrolled fermentation, when wild
yeasts and various strains of bacteria are introduced to foods, can result in

=== PAGE 21 ===
something delicious but often results in something spoiled and inedible.
Learning to control the process has had numerous benefits for humans. It
meant that human beings had enough to eat and drink over the course of a
year (don’t forget, there was no refrigeration). Control of the fermentation
ecosystem was already being practiced by human cultures long before
written records were kept. Our ancestors were adapted to their
environment and its resources and gave us a rich selection of foods that
have been preserved following traditions that are as old as humankind.
As we have refined our techniques and tools over time, the process has
become easier to control as well as easier to understand. There are a variety
of tools used in the fermentation process, ranging from using one’s senses to
judge color, flavor, or texture to more accurate tools and technologies, such
as thermometers, hydrometers, metering tubes, and siphons.
Microbes are everywhere in the environment, including large systems
like oceans or the soil and small systems like our guts. When a given type of
microbe has plenty of the things it needs, like food and water, and relatively
little of the things that are harmful to it, like very high or low temperatures
or acid levels, and not too much competition, the microbe thrives. As it
grows and reproduces, it converts sugar into alcohol and acids.
There are two types of organisms that play a key role in fermentation:
fungi and bacteria. In general, bacteria produce acids, while fungi produce
alcohol. Some foods are fermented with a combination of fungi and bacteria.
Fungi are yeasts and molds that are used to produce wine, beer, cheese,
and bread. They produce ethanol, a type of alcohol, and give off carbon
dioxide (producing the air pockets in bread and the “eyes” in some cheeses).
Even though the alcohol is not the point of fermenting a dough, it does add
specific flavors to the bread.
The strain of bacteria that is most often associated with fermented foods
is Lactobacillus (used in pickles, cheeses, and fermented sausages); this
strain gives fermented foods a specific tanginess that is the result of the
lactic acid it produces. A different strain of bacteria, Acetobacter, produces
acetic acid from the alcohol in wine and hard cider, giving us vinegar.
The requirements for controlled fermentation are a desirable strain of
microbes, the right type of organic material, and the ability to create the
optimum environment for fermenting.

=== PAGE 22 ===
MANAGING THE FERMENTING ENVIRONMENT
Some microbes cause foods to rot and putrefy. Others compete with the
desirable microbes, preventing fermentation from taking place. The goal of
food fermentation is to encourage the good microbes that turn cucumbers
into tart crisp pickles or grape juice into wine while discouraging or
destroying the bad microbes that create funky molds and foul odors. By
repeatedly allowing the same sequence of bacteria to grow in foods, bakers,
brewers, cheesemakers, vintners, and food preservationists are able to
produce foods and beverages with consistent flavors and textures.
INTRODUCING OR ENCOURAGING A DESIRABLE
STRAIN
Some types of fermentation occur because wild yeasts and bacteria are
present on the surface of food or in the environment. This type of wild
fermentation is still used today for pickling vegetables or making bread.
In other instances, a specific type of starter is called for. They might be
cultures or starters, or they may be purified forms that can be used to create
a very specific product.
The goal is to encourage the good microbes that give us lactic acid for
tart pickles while discouraging or destroying the bad microbes that might
result in funky molds.
Different organisms have different requirements. Some need plenty of
oxygen all the time (aerobic), some cannot be exposed to oxygen
(anaerobic), and some get along either way (facultative). Likewise, most
have a preferred temperature range: very cold (cryophilic), mid-range
(mesophilic), or very warm (thermophilic). Knowing an organism’s favorite
temperature and being able to maintain it throughout fermentation is one of
the most important keys to success. Some organisms like the environment
to be fairly acidic, some prefer an environment that is alkaline, and some
prefer a neutral environment that is neither acidic nor alkaline.
Salt is a key player not only because of the way it changes the amount of
water that is available in the environment. Adding salt also changes the acid

=== PAGE 23 ===
level (pH) of the ecosystem. Some bacteria, like Lactobacillus, thrive in the
conditions a salty environment creates. Once they are established, they can
also change the pH of the environment.
Lacto-fermentation, the procedure used to produce pickled vegetables,
fruits, meats, and dairy foods, is an anaerobic process. By depriving the
bacteria that cause foods to rot of oxygen, we create an environment that
favors other bacteria. The lactic acid that Lactobacillus bacteria produce
gives pickles their characteristic taste and turns milk into yogurt or cheese.
STOPPING OR SLOWING FERMENTATION
At some point in the fermentation process, equilibrium will be reached. The
feverish activity of the first stages of fermentation will stop or slow
significantly. Some ferments change from cloudy to clear as the dead cells
settle to the bottom of the fermentation vat.
Modern refrigerators are generally slightly colder than traditional cold
storage or cellar temperatures (around 37°F, just a few degrees from
freezing). While fermented foods stored in the refrigerator continue to
ferment, it happens much more slowly. Cold storage temperatures
maintained in caves or cellars (40° to 50°F) also slow fermentation; in
addition, these temperatures are appropriate for some foods or beverages
like hard cheeses or wine that need additional time and aging in order to
develop the desired flavor, texture, color, and aroma.
Another way to stop or slow fermentation is to raise the temperature of
the food to about 180°F. This heat treatment pasteurizes the food, killing off
the microbes responsible for fermentation. That means that you no longer
get the benefits of the living probiotics, of course, but you will have a more
shelf-stable item.
FERMENTING AND SPOILING
Saftey is a major concern for lacto-fermented foods. But fermented foods
are far more likely to resist spoilage than other foods because their
environment is unfriendly to those types of microbes. Fermented foods can
spoil, of course, but when they do, your nose and eyes are a sufficient early

=== PAGE 24 ===
warning system. By contrast, even cooked foods that look, smell, and taste
just fine can still harbor the pathogens that produce food-borne illnesses.
The process of fermentation is complex and involves many variables.
Food scientists are still investigating its myriad aspects. Regardless of how
many interlocking systems there may be at work at a cellular level, the
cook’s work when it comes to fermenting foods is direct and
straightforward. The waiting is probably the hardest part.

=== PAGE 25 ===
CHAPTER 3
How Fermentation Works
You can ferment almost any food as long as you have the right combination
of microbes and a rich source of nourishment. The basic ingredients for
fermentation are rarely exotic or difficult to find. You probably have most of
them in your kitchen right now.
BACTERIA
Lacto-fermentation requires the presence of Lactobacillus bacteria. There
are many different strains of Lactobacillus. Some prefer a certain type of
food; some work best with vegetables, some with dairy, some with fruit, and
some with alcohol. Lactobacillus bacteria are anaerobic, and they convert
sugar to alcohol in a process known as glycolysis. The bacteria also give off
gas (carbon dioxide) as part of the conversion process, which is why
containers for fermented pickles or kraut need to be opened periodically to
release gas or call for the use of an airlock to vent the gas as it builds up but
prevents oxygen from entering. Acetobacter bacteria need oxygen in order
to turn alcohol into vinegar.
As the bacteria grow in the nutrient-rich environment, they divide—one
cell becomes two, two cells become four. When cell division is occurring
rapidly, the overall population of the bacteria grows at a furious pace.
Therefore, it is easy to understand why you need only a small amount of
bacteria to ferment a large amount of food.
Some of the bacteria for lacto-fermentation are fairly widespread in the
environment. You simply let the bacteria that are already present multiply
by giving them the right environment. Or you introduce other types of
bacteria, such as adding buttermilk or yogurt to whole milk to make yogurt.
Some bacteria can thrive through many generations as long as they are
fed regularly. This is especially true of cultures that start with wild

=== PAGE 26 ===
ferments. Powdered and freeze-dried forms of bacteria for fermentation are
rarely effective after more than two or three ferments.
FUNGI
Yeast and molds are types of fungus that can ferment foods. The process is
slightly different, but the end result is the same. While bacteria reproduce
by simply splitting apart, yeast reproduce through a process called
“budding.” A small bud emerges on the parent cell. The parent cell nucleus
splits in two. One nucleus moves into the bud cell, which continues to grow
until it is large enough to split from the parent cell. When temperatures,
moisture, and nutrients are available, yeast can reproduce as dramatically
as bacteria.
Molds are used less frequently to ferment foods, although they do play a
role in the production of cheeses, certain wines, and specialty foods like the
so-called corn smut, or huitalacoche, of Mexico. The mold used to make
Roquefort is a type of penicillin, while the Botrytis cinerea mold that attacks
grapes on the vine is known as “noble rot” because it produces wines of
exceptional structure and bouquet.
Yeast and molds are naturally present everywhere. Because they are so
prolific, the native fungi will crowd out other strains. That is why a
sourdough starter that moves from San Francisco to New York eventually
loses its typical San Francisco tang in favor of the local population. It is also
why some wine or beer makers prefer to use strains of yeast developed
especially for wines and beers.
MOTHERS, SCOBYS, KEFIR GRAINS, AND WHEY
A mother will develop in any raw or unfiltered vinegar eventually. The
bacteria that is responsible for turning wine into vinegar gets into the wine
via a ride on the vinegar wasp and once in, they get to work eating the
alcohol and turning it to vinegar. Eventually, a colony of cellulose and
bacteria starts to form into what is best described as a blob. This blob is
called the “mother.” The appearance of a mother can be disturbing if you
aren’t expecting to find one inside your vinegar. It looks grayish and slimy

=== PAGE 27 ===
and is covered with spots and blotches.
A mother will continue to live almost indefinitely, as long as it is fed
periodically with fresh wine. Eventually, a second blob, or a baby, will form
on top of the mother. The older mother generally begins to sink as it
becomes less active. Older mothers are less potent, but they are almost
always potent enough to be given to someone who wants to start brewing
their own vinegar.
Some vinegar-making enthusiasts suggest using a specific type of
mother for each wine (one for red wine, one for white, and one for cider).
Others don’t think it makes much difference.
SCOBY stands for “symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast.” A SCOBY is
the gelatinous blob that forms on the surface of sweetened tea as it
ferments. The specific bacteria and yeast feed on the sugary tea, creating
kombucha. At the end of fermentation, the kombucha tastes tart and
refreshing, quite unlike the sweet tea that it began as. A new SCOBY grows
with each batch of kombucha you brew.
Kefir grains are similar to a SCOBY. They also contain both yeast and
bacteria. Some are meant for dairy, while others can be used for nondairy
liquids (including nondairy milks). When they are used to brew a batch of
kefir, the grains grow. You might eventually find yourself with more than
you can handle. That’s when you have to decide whether to share or
compost.
Whey is the liquid part of milk that drains away from curds. This liquid
contains the Lactobacillus bacteria used to ferment a wide variety of foods,
including fruits, vegetables, and meats. Whey is not necessary for
fermentation, but it can have the effect of speeding it up. Many fermenting
enthusiasts opt for using a little salt instead of whey. Others feel that whey
contributes to the pickle’s nutritional value as well as its flavor. Our recipes
offer both options. You can make your own whey by draining homemade or
commercial yogurt or kefir as described here. (If you are using commercial
yogurt, use plain yogurt that contains live or active cultures.)
STARTERS
Traditional bread bakers around the world have always relied on
prefermented doughs to help leaven breads. Each preferment has its own

=== PAGE 28 ===
characteristics. Some are left to ferment for only a few hours and are very
wet. Prefermenting the dough gives it enough time to develop rich flavors
because the yeast is able to develop slowly.
Sourdough starters are similar to preferments in some ways. The main
difference is that you use up the entire preferment when you make the final
dough. When you are working with a sourdough starter, you use only a
portion of the starter for your bread; you keep a portion of it alive by
feeding it.
Specific flours are used to make sourdoughs for a wide array of global
breads, from San Francisco sourdough boules and baguettes to a French
miche or German rye, from Russia’s buckwheat blini to the millet-based
injera of Ethiopia.
Establishing and maintaining a starter is a commitment of time and
energy, but there is no substitute for rich, appealing flavor it produces in
bread.
SELECTING INGREDIENTS FOR FRESHNESS
Buying or growing foods that are additive-free and raised without chemical
fertilizers and pesticides makes a lot of sense when you are preserving
foods, especially if you will be including the skins. But there is no specific
requirement that the foods you use must be organic. Fermentation has
always been employed to preserve the foods that are in season. They can be
in any state from immature to overripe, as long as they are not moldy or at
the point of disintegration.
FRESH PRODUCE
When a food is at its peak and bountiful, that’s the time to preserve it. Some
foods have specific and very short seasons, like asparagus, garlic scapes, or
strawberries. Others have longer seasons as different varieties of the same
fruit or vegetable come to maturity, such as apples or tomatoes.
As a general rule, fruits and vegetables should be rinsed and trimmed to
remove stems or bruises. One notable exception is grapes for making wine.
Rinsing them would remove the yeasts that are present on the grape’s

=== PAGE 29 ===
surface.
SALT
The type of salt you use can make a difference in the way your ferments
taste. Kosher salt is good because it has no additives. However, the grains
are large and they often take more time to dissolve than salt with finer
grains. Table salt, in addition to containing dextrose (sugar), contains
anticaking ingredients and sometimes iodine, both of which can affect the
flavor and appearance of your pickles. Canning and pickling salt is additive-
free and very fine, so that it dissolves more easily. Sea salts vary greatly in
terms of flavor and mineral content. In the end, the type of salt you choose is
a matter of preference and price.
WATER
If your drinking water is treated with chlorine or fluoride, you should
consider using filtered or bottled spring water for fermenting.
RAW MILK AND CIDER
In most parts of the country, selling raw milk and cider is illegal, unless the
farm itself is certified to sell milk. Customers must go to the farm and
purchase the milk directly from the farmer. There are some fermented
foods that are difficult, if not impossible, to make without raw milk or cider.
Clabbered cream, for instance, is nothing more that raw milk left to separate
at room temperature. Pasteurized cider is missing the bacteria necessary to
turn the fruit juice into alcohol. In general, however, any milk or cream that
is not ultra-pasteurized or treated with preservatives can be used to make
most cultured dairy foods. In fact, raw milk has some disadvantages if you
plan to make it into yogurt. The bacteria in the raw milk can eventually
crowd out the bacteria that turn it into yogurt. In that case, you must
maintain a separate strain of starter made with pasteurized milk.

=== PAGE 30 ===
CHAPTER 4
Your Home Fermentation
Laboratory
Many fermented foods can be made with tools you already own or that you
can buy easily and inexpensively at the grocery or hardware store. Check
local listings to see if there are any brewing or wine-making supply stores in
the area. See Resources to track down specialty items online.
Here are things you probably already have in your kitchen:
Measuring cups
Small digital scale
Spoons
Sieves and colanders
Bowls
Knives
Graters
Cutting board
Vegetable peeler
If you don’t have these on hand, you can find them at the grocery store:
Cheesecloth
Funnel
In addition, you’ll need:

=== PAGE 31 ===
Containers
Lids
The following are helpful, but not always necessary:
Thermometer
Hydrometer
Airlocks
Weights
Siphons
Bottle brushes
Food processors, blenders, and other appliances can be helpful, but they
are not necessary. You can almost always accomplish the same thing
manually.
CONTAINERS FOR FERMENTING
The size, material, and shape of your container depend on what the food is
and what quantity you are making. Glass and food-grade plastic are fine.
Glazed ceramic is the traditional choice for pickling crocks.
Glass canning jars: These jars range in size from 4 ounces to 1 gallon.
Wide-mouth jars are indicated when a recipe calls for them. Canning jars
may have two-piece screw tops or a clamp seal with a rubber gasket.
Buckets and carboys: You need a large container for batches that won’t
fit easily in a canning jar or that may froth and form during the early stages
of fermentation. Food-grade plastic buckets are one option. Carboys, large
glass jars with narrow necks, are another. These containers come in a wide
range of sizes, from 1 to 10 gallons (or even larger.) Plastic fermenting
buckets should have airtight lids. Carboys should have plugs to seal the
necks.
Pickle or kraut crocks: Ceramic crocks, glazed on the inside and
without any scratches, are the traditional choice for making pickles. Some
crocks have lids. You may be able to find crocks in antique and thrift shops.
Check to be sure that there are no scratches in the glaze because scratches

=== PAGE 32 ===
can harbor harmful bacteria.
WEIGHTS
When you put foods into a liquid brine, they will float. If they are above the
brine, they are coming in contact with oxygen. To prevent that, add a weight
to the top of the food. You can buy weights of various weights and in shapes
meant to fit specific crocks or other containers. You can also make your own
weight by putting a dish or plate on top of the food and setting a bottle filled
with water on top of the plate.
AIRLOCKS
An airlock is a device that releases the gases that build up in the fermenting
container so it doesn’t explode. Monitoring the airlock gives you an idea of
how fermentation is progressing. Early in the process, you see lots of
bubbles. As fermentation slows down, the rate drops to less than one bubble
per minute.
BOTTLES AND CAPS FOR FERMENTED BEVERAGES
You can use glass bottles for wine or beer that you already have, provided
they are not chipped or cracked. Grolsch beer bottles with their clamp seals
are especially popular. There is a variety of stoppers for fermented
beverages, including corks, clamp-style stoppers, and caps. You can find
these stoppers, as well as the tools that insert corks or attach bottle caps, at
brewing supply stores (you may be able to use their equipment to cork or
cap your bottles) or online.
THERMOMETERS
Dairy ferments are hard to do correctly without accurate thermometers.
You should have an accurate instant-read thermometer (sometimes called a

=== PAGE 33 ===
stem thermometer). A floating thermometer helps you keep track of
temperatures during the fermentation process. They are made both with
digital or analog displays.
HYDROMETERS
A hydrometer measures the strength of a liquid. When a brewer takes a
reading and compares it to a chart, he or she can determine the amount of
alcohol in the brew. To use a simple hydrometer, lower the bulb into the
liquid and spin it to remove any air bubbles that would make it float higher.
A gauge on the stem provides the reading, which is taken at the level of the
liquid on the gauge.
SIPHONS
Getting a liquid out of the fermenting container without disturbing the
sediment is easiest with some food-grade plastic tubing. This tubing can
usually be found at hardware stores and appliance shops. A piece that is 6 to
7 feet long is usually adequate. Clamps hold the tubing closed, and bottle
fillers act like a stopper to hold the siphon closed when you are filling
bottles.
SANITATION
Cleanliness matters. Always wash all your tools and containers thoroughly
in hot, soapy water. Use a bottle brush to reach inside containers and make
sure that you clean out any crevices or corners completely. Rinse everything
in hot water and let it air-dry.
For most fermenting projects, having clean hands, clean cutting boards,
and a clean stem on the thermometer is sufficient.
Most brewers take the added step of sterilizing their equipment and
containers. You can do this in several ways. Glass and metal tools can be
sterilized in a bath of boiling water or with steam, but this may not be
practical for large pieces or those made of plastic. In that case, you can make

=== PAGE 34 ===
a solution of chlorine bleach and water (about 1 tablespoon of bleach per 1
gallon of water). Submerge the pieces in the solution and let them soak for
20 minutes. Some home brewers do this in a very clean bathtub. Rinse the
pieces in hot water.
There are other sanitizers available that do not have to be rinsed off,
sold under a variety of names. Campden tablets are one common product.
Be sure to follow the instructions for the sanitizer you are using.
BASIC TECHNIQUES
Unlike cooking, which calls for mastering a wide range of techniques,
fermenting primarily consists of combining ingredients and then letting
time do the rest of the work. However, it is necessary to adjust the
environment to achieve certain effects.
CREATING AN INCUBATOR
Foods that must ferment in a warm environment that ranges from 90 to
125°F call for an incubator. You will need to experiment at first to find the
right spot in your home for your various ferments. You can use one of the
following approaches:
Set your ferment on a heating pad or a seedling pad.
Put your ferment in a picnic cooler; add jars of hot water to keep the
environment warm.
Put your ferment on top of the refrigerator.
Put your ferment in the oven with the pilot light on, if you have one, or
your oven light on. If necessary, you can add pans of hot water to heat
the interior of the oven.
Put your ferment on top of an “always on” device like a cable box or a
DVD player.

=== PAGE 35 ===
FERMENTING AT ROOM TEMPERATURE
There is really nothing special involved in fermenting at room temperature
unless your rooms are cooler than 60°F or warmer than 80°F. Here are a
few basic considerations:
Most ferments should be out of direct sunlight. Otherwise, the
countertop is fine. So are the insides of cupboards.
Some ferments attract fruit flies. If this happens, put a dish or bowl
nearby filled with fruit juice. Add a few drops of dish detergent and put it
near the fruit flies. The juice will attract them, but when they land on the
liquid, the detergent will make them stick.
Many ferments should not be moved or jiggled.
If you have different ferments going on at room temperature at the same
time, keep them separated by about 10 feet.

=== PAGE 36 ===
PART TWO
Recipes

=== PAGE 37 ===

=== PAGE 38 ===

