=== PAGE 148 ===
Wine Making Superstore: www.winemakingsuperstore.com
* Also search local listings for brewing supplies and brewing supply stores in your area.

=== PAGE 149 ===
Glossary
Anaerobic: Environments without oxygen. In fermentation, an anaerobic
environment is necessary for breaking down carbohydrates and turning
them into sugar.
Brine: A saltwater solution for pickling or fermenting that acts on food by
drawing out the water from its cells and killing any harmful bacteria that
might spoil the food.
Buttermilk: A cultured milk, traditionally the by-product of churning
butter.
Carboy: A large glass container used for primary fermentation.
Clabbered cream: A cultured cream made by allowing cream to rise to the
surface of raw milk.
Incubator: Any object or equipment that will help keep a fermented food at
the desired temperature throughout the fermentation process.
Kimchi: Korean-style fermented cabbage; generally spicy.
Kefir: A fermented beverage made with kefir grains.
Koji: A fermented starter used to produce miso grown on rice or barley. It is
responsible for breaking down the carbohydrates and sugars in food
products.
Kombucha: A fermented drink that originated in ancient China. It is made
from a SCOBY (see below), tea, and sugar. It has a slightly tangy taste.
Kvass: A fermented Russian brewed drink made from rye bread or beets. It

=== PAGE 150 ===
has a flavor that’s similar to root beer or cola.
Lactic acid: Stops the growth of harmful bacteria that might spoil food. It’s
produced by Lactobacillus in fermented foods.
Lactobacillus: A bacteria that helps produce lactic acid from carbohydrates.
It is responsible for turning starches into sugars and acids and is essential
for the fermentation process.
Phytic acid: These antinutrients are naturally occurring in some grains and
can prevent healthy minerals from being absorbed by the body.
Primary fermentation: Initial stage in brewed beverages; the beverage is
typically removed from sediment by transferring it to a secondary
fermentation container or bottles.
Probiotics: Microorganisms that are healthful for the body and gut and that
occur naturally in foods.
SCOBY: Symbiotic colony of bacteria and yeast. It is an essential culture
needed for kombucha making.
Starter: Another name for any prefermented product. Starter cultures can
be purchased commercially or made at home.
Wort: In home brewing, the name for the beverage or soda mix before the
starter has been added and initiated fermentation.

=== PAGE 151 ===
References
Azam-Ali, M. M. (1998). Fermented Fruits and Vegetables: A Global
Perspective. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin No. 134.
Fallon, Sally. (1999). Nourishing Traditions: The Cookbook That Challenges
Politically Correct Nutrition and the Diet Dictocrats. New Trends Publishing,
Warsaw, Ind.
Katz, S. E. (2003). The Art of Fermentation: An In-Depth Exploration of
Essential Concepts and Processes from Around the World. Chelsea Green
Publishing, White River Junction, Vt.
Katz, S. E. (2003.). Wild Fermentation: The Flavor, Nutrition, and Craft of
Live-Culture Foods. Chelsea Green Publishing, White River Junction, Vt.
Lewin, A. (2012). Real Food Fermentation: Preserving Whole Fresh Food with
Live Cultures in Your Home. Quarry Books, Beverly, Mass.

